A servomotor is a closed-loop servomechanism that uses position feedback 
(either linear or rotational position) to control its motion and final position. 
The input to its control is a signal (either analog or digital) 
representing the desired position of the output shaft.



Arduino UNO is a microcontroller board based on the ATmega328P. It has 14 digital input/output pins (of which 6 can be used as PWM outputs), 
6 analog inputs, a 16 MHz ceramic resonator, a USB connection, a power jack, an ICSP header and a reset button.
 It contains everything needed to support the microcontroller; simply connect it to a computer with a USB cable or
 power it with a AC-to-DC adapter or battery to get started. You can tinker with your UNO without worrying too much about doing something wrong, 
worst case scenario you can replace the chip for a few dollars and start over again.



Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) gas sensors detect leaks in LPG gas and warn before gas levels reach dangerous levels.
 When LPG leaks, gas molecules interact with the sensor's surface, changing the resistance of the sensing material.
 This change is converted into an electrical signal that triggers an alarm or other indicator. 


Buzzer meaning electronic component that generates sound through the transmission of electrical signals. 
Its primary function is to provide an audible alert or notification and typically operates within a voltage range of 5V to 12V.

 The Mini Solderless Breadboard is a solderless device for a temporary prototypes with electronics and test circuit designs.
 It consists of 17 columns of ten holes, divided into two pairs by a central notch and labelled 1 to 17.

A gas regulator is a mechanical device that controls the pressure and flow of gas to an appliance or cylinder

Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) is widely used for cooking, heating, and fueling vehicles due to its high energy content and ease of storage.
 However, LPG is highly flammable and can pose significant risks if leaked. Early detection of gas leaks is crucial to prevent potential hazards, 
such as fires and explosions. An LPG gas detection system can provide an effective solution to ensure safety by alerting users to the presence of gas leaks.


 Objective of LPG Gas Sensor and Detection System

The primary objective of the LPG Gas Sensor and Detection System is to ensure safety and prevent accidents related to LPG gas leaks.
 This system aims to achieve the following specific goals:

1. Early Detection of LPG Leaks: 
   - Continuously monitor the environment for the presence of LPG gas.
   - Detect even small concentrations of LPG to provide early warnings.

2. Immediate Alert Mechanism:
   - Trigger an audible alarm using a buzzer to alert occupants of a gas leak.
   - Activate visual indicators (such as LEDs) to provide a clear visual signal of danger.

3. Automated and Reliable Operation:
   - Ensure the system operates autonomously without the need for manual intervention.
   - Maintain high reliability and accuracy in gas detection under various environmental conditions.

4. User-Friendly and Accessible:
   - Design the system to be easy to install and use, making it accessible to a wide range of users, including households and small businesses.
   - Provide clear and understandable alerts that can be easily recognized by users of all ages.

5. Cost-Effective Solution:
   - Utilize affordable components to create a cost-effective safety solution.
   - Offer an economical alternative to more expensive commercial gas detection systems without compromising safety and effectiveness.

6. Integration Capability:
   - Enable integration with other safety systems, such as home automation systems or emergency response systems, to enhance overall safety measures.

By meeting these objectives, the LPG Gas Sensor and Detection System aims to minimize the risk of fire, explosions, and other hazards associated with LPG leaks,
 thereby protecting lives and property.



The LPG gas detection system operates based on the following steps:

Gas Sensing:
 The MQ-2 sensor continuously monitors the air for the presence of LPG gas. 
The sensor output varies based on the concentration of gas detected.

Signal Processing:
 The Arduino Uno reads the analog signal from the MQ-2 sensor.
 It converts this analog signal to a digital value that represents the gas concentration.

Threshold Comparison:
 The Arduino compares the digital value with a predefined threshold.
 This threshold is set based on the safe limit of LPG concentration.

Alert Mechanism:
 If the gas concentration exceeds the threshold, the Arduino activates the buzzer and LED to alert the user of a potential gas leak.


Implementing an LPG gas detection system involves several steps from component assembly to programming and testing. 
Below is a detailed procedure to set up and operate an LPG gas detection sensor using an Arduino Uno and an MQ-2 gas sensor.

Step 1:
Gather Components and Tools
Arduino Uno
MQ-2 gas sensor module
Buzzer
LED
Resistor (220 ohms)
Breadboard and jumper wires
USB cable for Arduino
Power supply (9V battery or USB from a computer)

Step 2: Assemble the Circuit

Connect the MQ-2 Gas Sensor:
Connect the VCC pin of the MQ-2 sensor to the 5V pin on the Arduino.
Connect the GND pin of the MQ-2 sensor to the GND pin on the Arduino.
Connect the Analog Output (A0) pin of the MQ-2 sensor to the Analog Input (A0) pin on the Arduino.
Connect the Buzzer
Connect one terminal of the buzzer to the Digital Pin 8 on the Arduino.
Connect the other terminal of the buzzer to the GND pin on the Arduino.
Connect the LED
Connect the anode (longer leg) of the LED to the Digital Pin 7 on the Arduino through a 220-ohm resistor.
Connect the cathode (shorter leg) of the LED to the GND pin on the Arduino.
Step 3: Write and Upload the Arduino Code
Open the Arduino IDE on your computer.
Copy and paste the following code into the Arduino IDE:
cpp
Copy code
const int gasSensorPin = A0; // Analog pin connected to MQ-2 sensor
const int buzzerPin = 8;     // Digital pin connected to buzzer
const int ledPin = 7;        // Digital pin connected to LED
const int gasThreshold = 300; // Threshold value for gas detection

void setup() {
  pinMode(gasSensorPin, INPUT);
  pinMode(buzzerPin, OUTPUT);
  pinMode(ledPin, OUTPUT);
  Serial.begin(9600);
}

void loop() {
  int gasLevel = analogRead(gasSensorPin); // Read gas sensor value
  Serial.println(gasLevel); // Print gas level for debugging
  if (gasLevel > gasThreshold) {
    digitalWrite(buzzerPin, HIGH); // Turn on buzzer
    digitalWrite(ledPin, HIGH);    // Turn on LED
  } else {
    digitalWrite(buzzerPin, LOW);  // Turn off buzzer
    digitalWrite(ledPin, LOW);     // Turn off LED
  }
  delay(1000); // Wait for a second before the next reading
}




Connect the Arduino to your computer using the USB cable.
Select the correct board and port from the Tools menu in the Arduino IDE.
Upload the code to the Arduino by clicking the upload button (right arrow icon).

Step 4: Test the System
Power the Arduino using a 9V battery or the USB connection from your computer.
Open the Serial Monitor in the Arduino IDE to observe the gas sensor readings.
Introduce a small amount of LPG gas near the MQ-2 sensor. You can use a lighter (without igniting it) to release a small amount of gas.
Observe the response of the system:
The LED should light up.
The buzzer should sound an alarm.
The Serial Monitor should show increased gas level readings.

Step 5: Calibrate and Adjust the Threshold
If necessary, adjust the gasThreshold value in the code based on the environment and sensitivity requirements.
Re-upload the modified code to the Arduino.
Repeat the testing procedure to ensure the system responds correctly at the new threshold level.


An LPG gas detection system using Arduino Uno and an MQ-2 gas sensor is an effective 
and affordable solution to enhance safety in environments where LPG is used. 
This system provides real-time monitoring and immediate alerts, allowing for quick action to prevent dangerous situations. 
The simplicity of Arduino programming and the availability of components make it accessible for both hobbyists and professionals.
